---
title: "A friendly introduction to assembly for high-level programmers — Functions & Loops"
description: "A friendly introduction to assembly for high-level programmers — Functions & Loops"
categories: ["assembly", "x86", "guide"]
date: "2024-09-24"
series: A friendly introduction to assembly for high-level programmers
---

[In the previous article]({% post_url 2024-09-16-x86-64-conditionals %}) we learned about Control Transfer Instructions, and we have seen how they are the cornerstone of control flow in assembly. We looked at the simplest of them, jump, and learned how to implement conditionals.

Today we will look at reproducing functions. Starting with no arguments, `void` functions, all the way up to functions returning multiple values.

{% assign series_name = page.series %} {% include collection.html name=series_name %}

## Nullary Void Functions

The definition of function[^1] we will be using in this article is:

> A reusable portion of a program that can take inputs and return outputs

From what we have seen in the previous article, _jumps_ seem like a good approximation of a function: they provide a mechanism to execute code from elsewhere, and they have a human-readable name. What could one desire more?

In high-level languages, functions do their job and hand back control to the caller once they are done, typically with the `return` keyword. Jumps, on the other hand, are _one-way control transfer_: once you jump to a location there is no way back, unless the callee knows where to jump to.

The premise that we need to control callee and caller hinders _reusability_, the first property we expect from functions. Imagine trying to use third-party libraries in your program; their functions would have to know details about your code’s structure and where to jump back, making it impossible to write modular or reusable code.

How do we make this execution model _caller-independent_? 

At any point in time, we know the address of the instruction in execution: it's in the `rip`, the instruction pointer. The caller can store the `rip` before jumping, and expect the callee to jump back to the next instruction after the stored location. Victory!

The only problem we have left is that all this bookkeeping is tedious and error-prone. This is why assembly comes with two instructions, `call` (call) and `ret` (return) that do the math for us. Let's look at them.

The first, `call` looks very much like a jump
```nasm
call label
```
and, under the hood, is not that different: it jumps to the provided label, but before jumping, it stores the address of the current instruction. The return location is stored in a special location of the memory called _the stack_. 

> **Note**
>
> We will look into the details of the stack in the next article. For now, all you need to know is that it's a memory location where you can store values and retrieve them later.

Much like in high-level languages, at the end of a function we _return_ to hand the control back to the caller. In assembly, we do the same utilizing the `ret` (return) instruction
```nasm
label:
  ; code of the function
  ret
```
Just like a [Scooby Doo mask off moment](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L0ozIHomn8Q&t=174s), what we see is once again a jump: `ret` fetches the value stored on _the stack_ by `call` and jumps back there, giving back control without having to know anything about the caller. 

Let's look at a concrete example. 

We’re going to create a little [dungeon crawler](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dungeon_crawl) game where our explorer navigates a maze to find a treasure. We will learn a few new instructions and make extensive use of functions and their reusability to reduce boilerplate. Incidentally, we will find out that we have all we need to implement loops in assembly, our second high-level programming concept for this article.

<code-editor exercise="03-nullary-functions.asm"></code-editor>

## Here Comes Arity

Alright, that was a lot to take in! But the good news is we’ve already covered most of the heavy lifting for today. Great job!

Now, we only have two key concepts left: **passing parameters** and **returning values** in functions. And the best part? You've already seen both!

In the examples above, we got comfortable with passing data between functions using **registers**. 

For example, before calling `print`, we set the values of `rsi` and `rdx` so that the function had the right data in the correct registers. That's how parameters are typically[^2] passed to functions in assembly.

Returning values works the same, but in reverse: when a function needs to return a result, it places the value in a designated register, allowing the caller to retrieve it from there.

This system does feel a bit brittle, doesn’t it? How can we make sure that functions don’t overwrite registers we're relying on? How do we decide which registers to use inside a function? And how do we maintain values across function calls?

### Calling Conventions

Since the language  can't inherently enforce low-level rules, we rely on _calling conventions_—agreed-upon guidelines for passing parameters, returning results, and using registers to ensure data integrity.

These conventions are part of the Application Binary Interface (ABI), which is specific to each operating system[^3]. Our ABI of reference will be [x86-64 System V ABI](https://gitlab.com/x86-psABIs/x86-64-ABI/-/jobs/artifacts/master/raw/x86-64-ABI/abi.pdf?job=build), commonly used in most Unix-like systems.

To prevent unintended data overwriting, the ABI introduces two register categories: **callee-saved** and **caller-saved**.

* _callee-saved_ means the callee must either not use the register or save its original value before use and restore it before returning control to the calling function.

* _caller-saved_ means that, if the caller needs to preserve the data in this register across a function call, it must save the data to the stack before the call and restore it afterward.

In practical terms, this means that the caller-saved registers can be safely overwritten in a function

Here's the condensed version of the calling convention that we will use in this course. 

| Register | Usage                                      | Saved by? |
|:---      |:---                                        |:---       |
| rax      | 1st return register                        | Caller    |
| rdi      | 1st function argument                      | Caller    |
| rsi      | 2nd function argument                      | Caller    |
| rdx      | 3rd function argument, 2nd return register | Caller    |
| rcx      | 4th function argument                      | Caller    |
| r10-r11  | for temporary data                         | Caller    |
| r12-r15  | for temporary data                         | Callee    |

Let's see another example.

<code-editor exercise="03-functions.asm"></code-editor>

## Conclusion

We explored how functions work using `call` and `ret`, and learned about calling conventions to safely pass parameters, return values, and manage registers without breaking things. These building blocks make our code reusable and organized.

Next up, we’ll dive into _the stack_—our new tool for handling data beyond registers and unlocking even more flexibility in our functions.

{% include post-footer.html %}

---

[^1]: Finding an agreed upon definition of function is not that easy, hence why I came up with a new one. Imagine how different functions are between functional programming, lambda calculus, and mathematics, for example. Speaking of wide definitions, here's a fun personal anecdote: during my studies I had two _harmonic functions_ classes in the same semester, one in math school and the other in jazz school.

[^2]: You might be wondering what happens when you have more arguments than registers or when data is larger than a register's size. In the next lesson we will learn more about the stack and answer all these questions. 

[^3]: More precisely, the ABI specifies how different binaries (such as a program and the operative system) interact at the binary level. Besides calling conventions, it specifies how binaries are formatted, how data is laid out in memory, and system call interface. You can imagine it as a low-level equivalent of an API (Application Programming Interface) for more programs.  

{% include code-editor.html %}
